.. _intersect:arch:iri:patterns:data:

Data Integration-Intensive
--------------------------

According to the :term:`IRI` Architecture Blueprint Activity :cite:`IRI:2023`,
data integration-intensive patterns are characterized by a need to perform
analysis of data combined from multiple sources, which can include data from
multiple sites, experiments, and/or simulations. This can also include tracking
metadata and provenance for reproducible science and interactive data analysis,
possibly at scale.

The Data Integration-Intensive Pattern Group of the :term:`IRI` Architecture
Blueprint Activity recognized at least two broad pattern areas within this
class:

- Integration of data from simulations and experiments/observations to generate
  new insight and subsequent direct actions.

- Cross-site data-driven discovery, which includes using similar, multimodal,
  or heterogeneous data already generated at different facilities, or running
  the same tool, e.g., simulation software, on different systems, or
  experimental/observational data originating at different sources, the results
  of which must be combined, processed, and analyzed.

The Data Integration-Intensive Patterns Group also identified some gaps and
opportunities

- **Gaps:**
  Cross-facility :term:`API` for resource co-operations; common/appropriate
  resource allocation models; standard abstracted workflow and automation
  tools; complex-wide data storage and searching capabilities; new models for
  “wide-area” cybersecurity; common or well-understood data policies; lack of
  :term:`FAIR` data; user-focused user experience; lack of portable code; and
  crosstraining of staff (scientific, engineering, support, and
  administrative).
  
- **Opportunities:**
  Many early-win science opportunities exist for this pattern; common
  :term:`API` for facilities; standards for metadata; streaming data to/from
  compute and storage facilities; common and well-understood data policies;
  support for :term:`FAIR` data; and templates for portable code

Relationship to INTERSECT Science Use Case Design Patterns
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Data Integration-Intensive :term:`IRI` Pattern is related to all
:term:`INTERSECT` patterns in terms of the data generated by experiments and
the corresponding need for metadata tracking and data provenance to enable
reproducibility and insight through analysis.

This :term:`IRI` Pattern is more specifically related to the :term:`INTERSECT`
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:strategic:steering` strategic pattern and its
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:local_steering` and
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:distributed_steering`
architectural patterns, as experiment data analyis is performed in the feedback
loop during the experiment. This data may come from different sources, such as
different types of temperature sensors for a laser that is depositing metal in
a 3D manufacturing process. It may even include data from a computational
simulation, such as a structural stress simulation that takes past and current
temperature sensor readings into account.

It is also related in a special way to the :term:`INTERSECT`
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:strategic:design` strategic pattern and its
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:local_design` and
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:distributed_design`
architectural patterns, as experiment data analyis is performed in the feedback
loop between subsequent experiments to design them. The involved data may come
from a single or multiple preceeding experiments and from prior analysis of
such data. For example, a series of experiments is conducted to find a chemical
compound that fits certain characteristics. Before each experiment, the results
of prior experiments are analyzed to find the design point for the next
experiment. The analysis may include Bayesian design of experiments and/or
domain science informed :term:`AI`.

This pattern is also related in a particular way to the :term:`INTERSECT`
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:strategic:workflow` strategic pattern and its
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:local_workflow` and
:ref:`intersect:arch:pat:catalog:architectural:distributed_workflow`
architectural patterns, as data from multiple experiments that may depend on
each other is analyzed. This may include combining and analyzing data from
multiple experiments to inform a subsequent experiment in a complex workflow.
It also may include combining and analyzing data from multiple experiments to
produce the overall result of the workflow.
